[SOURCE: https://cbic-gst.gov.in]
Goods & Service Tax, CBIC, Government of India :: Home Attention This Tab “ACES Archives” displays web content as was available in the erstwhile www.aces.gov.in and for information only. For all transactions under Central Excise and Service Tax use the Tab “ACES (CE&ST;) Login” OK May I help you? For any queries and quick assistance, Click Here What's New Instructions for processing of applications for GST registration - regarding. Seeks to notify Central Goods and Services Tax (Second Amendment) Rules 2025 Clarification on applicability of late fee for delay in furnishing of FORM GSTR-9C- reg. Procedure to be followed in department appeal filed against interest and/or penalty only, related to Section 128A of the CGST Act, 2017 -regarding. Clarification regarding GST rates & classification (goods) based on the recommendations of the GST Council in its 55th meeting held on 21st December, 2024, at Jaisalmer -reg. Clarifications regarding applicability of GST on certain services – reg. Regularizing payment of GST on co-insurance premium apportioned by the lead insurer to the co-insurer and on ceding /re-insurance commission deducted from the reinsurance premium paid by the insurer to the reinsurer – reg. Seeks to appoint common adjudicating authority for Show cause notices issued by officers of DGGI. English | Hindi Seeks to extend the due date for furnishing FORM GSTR-3B for the month of October, 2024 for registered persons whose principal place of business is in the district of Murshidabad in the state of West Bengal. English | Hindi Amendment to Circular No. 31/05/2018-GST, dated 9th February, 2018 on 'Proper officer under sections 73 and 74 of the Central Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017 and under the Integrated Goods and Services Tax Act, 2017'–reg. Image Gallery CBIC MITRA HELPDESK Query Form 1800 1200 232 GSTN HELPDESK Disclaimer:Information is being made available at this site purely as a measure of public facilitation. While every effort has been made to ensure that the information hosted in this website is accurate and up-to-date, Central Board of Indirect Taxes and Customs does not hold itself liable for any consequences, legal or otherwise, arising out of use or abuse of any such information.

[SOURCE: https://legislative.gov.in]
Legislative Department | Legislative Department | India LATEST NEWS 35th Basic Course in Legislative Drafting New Inviting comments/view on draft recruitment rules for Group "A" posts in the Vidhi Sahitya Prakashan from stakeholders New 26th Appreciation course in Legislative Department from 7th April, 2025 to 21st April, 2025 New Fellowship Scheme New Internship Scheme New ABOUT US The Charter Act 1833 which was enacted by the British Parliament provided for the establishment of a Law Commission for consolidation and codification of Indian Laws. The said Act provided for the addition of a fourth ordinary Member to the Governor General in Council for India who was to be a legal expert in the making of laws. Lord Macaulay was appointed as the fourth ordinary Member and was entitled to participate in the meetings of the Governor General in Council for making of laws. In 1835, Lord Macaulay was appointed as Chairman of the First Law Commission. Sir James Stephen was appointed as a Law Member in place of Lord Macaulay. At that point of time a separate department known as the Legislative Department was functioning…. Read More Hon'ble Minister of State, Ministry of Law and Justice (Independent Charge) Shri Arjun Ram Meghwal Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav Manual of Election Law Election Laws Related Acts of Parliament from the year 1836-2024 e-Book Hindi e-Book English IMPORTANT ANNOUNCEMENTS Advertisement for Financial Assistance 35th Basic Course in Legislative Drafting 26th Appreciation course in Legislative Department from 7th April, 2025 to 21st April, 2025 Fellowship Scheme Internship Scheme View more OFFICIAL LANGUAGES WING Regional Languages Central Acts (Updated) Standard form of Legal Documents A list of the publications prepared by Official Languages Wing and VSP Online Selling of Central Acts & Law Publications Institute of Legislative Drafting and Research Legislative References VIDHI SAHITYA PRAKASHAN IMPORTANT LINKS Parliament of India Supreme Court of India Cabinet Secretariat Department of Legal Affairs Law Commission of India Directions by the Chairman, Rajya Sabha Directions by Speaker, Lok Sabha Constituent Assembly Debate Parliament Questions: Lok Sabha Parliament Questions: Rajya Sabha Live Telecast: Lok Sabha Live Telecast: Rajya Sabha Parliament Bill Search: Lok Sabha Parliament Bill Search: Rajya Sabha Public Grievances Legislative Bodies in India Court Case Status Union Budget Railway Budget National Voters services Portal Manual of Parliamentary Procedures in the Government of India Rules of Procedures and Conduct of Business: Lok Sabha Rules of Procedures and Conduct of Business: Rajya Sabha @ MLJ_GoI Photo Gallery Photo Gallery

[SOURCE: https://taxguru.in]
Complete Tax Solution: Latest Tax News India, Tax Notification Enter your
email Address Sponsored Login/Register My Profile Submit Post Books Softwares
Budget 2025 Follow Us: Latest Articles Eway bill 2.0 : New Change in GST Eway
bill Goods and Services Tax : GSTN launches E-Way Bill 2.0 on July 1, 2025,
offering dual portal interoperability for enhanced compliance, business
continuity, ... June 18, 2025 285 Views 0 comment Print Corporate
Restructuring Simplified: MCA Set to Expand Fast-Track Merger Route Company
Law : The MCA (Ministry of Corporate Affairs) has come up with a Draft
Notification on April 6, 2025, proposing key amendments to the Co... June 18,
2025 156 Views 0 comment Print Gujarat HC Strikes Down Rule 96(10), Allows GST
Refunds for Exporters Using Duty-Free Schemes Goods and Services Tax : Gujarat
High Court strikes down CGST Rule 96(10), enabling exporters to claim IGST
refunds regardless of duty-free imports. This r... June 18, 2025 210 Views 0
comment Print GSTR-1 vs GSTR-3B Mismatch: Direct Recovery Not Warranted-
Calcutta HC Goods and Services Tax : Calcutta High Court rules GSTR-1 and
GSTR-3B discrepancies don't allow direct tax recovery under Section 75(12) of
the CGST Act if... June 18, 2025 4281 Views 0 comment Print Can You Claim Tax
Deductions for Paying Someone Else’s Loan? Full Guide with Real Cases Income
Tax : Understand tax deductions for paying family's home or education loans.
Learn conditions for claiming benefits, including borrower ... June 18, 2025
669 Views 1 comment Print View All Articles Latest News Insolvency Petition
Filed Against Vishal Mega Mart Over ₹1.3 Crore Operational Debt Corporate Law
: A petition under Section 9 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016, has
been filed before the National Company Law Tribunal (N... June 18, 2025 51
Views 0 comment Print CS Executive Entrance Test (CSEET) on 5th July 2025 CA,
CS, CMA : Get essential instructions for the ICSI CSEET July 2025 exam,
conducted remotely. Learn about exam pattern, technical requirements... June
17, 2025 2784 Views 0 comment Print SEBI Consults on New Disclosure
Requirements for Securitised Debt Instruments SEBI : SEBI issues consultation
paper proposing mandatory half-yearly disclosures for Securitised Debt
Instruments (SDIs) to enhance tran... June 17, 2025 126 Views 0 comment Print
When Unknown PANs Haunt Your Inbox – How to Protect Yourself Income Tax :
Received an unknown PAN alert? Learn how to protect yourself! This article
covers a taxpayer's recent dilemma with unauthorized PA... June 16, 2025 2946
Views 0 comment Print All about MCA V3 Lot-3 Forms to Go Live from July 14,
2025 Company Law : MCA21 V3 Company Module Lot-3 to go live on July 14, 2025,
with 38 updated forms, linked filing, offline options, and improved com...
June 16, 2025 558 Views 0 comment Print View All News Latest Judiciary AO
should not have resorted to section 143(1) (a) and instead could have resorted
to section 143 (3): Chhattisgarh HC Income Tax : Raj Kumar Bothra Vs DCIT
(Chhattisgarh High Court) AO should not have resorted to section 143(1) (a)
and instead could have resort... June 18, 2025 18 Views 0 comment Print
Section 46 (2) applicable on Capital Gains Company Liquidation: FMV at
Distribution Date as Cost of Acquisition Upheld Income Tax : All these appeals
were filed for AY 1991-92. Appellants were shareholders in the company.
Earlier all three share holders were suc... June 18, 2025 18 Views 0 comment
Print Pre-existing dispute between the parties, could not have been resolved
under the Code: NCLAT Company Law : In the matter above-mentioned NCLAT have
held that pre-existing dispute between the ex-director and its management
company, could ... June 18, 2025 27 Views 0 comment Print HC held period of
reference couldn’t be excluded from Limitation u/s 153B if reference was
invalid Income Tax : Clause (ix) of the Explanation to Section 153B could not
be invoked to exclude the period of reference under the Indo-Swiss DTAA, ...
June 18, 2025 36 Views 0 comment Print Limitation Act applies for claims under
interest on delayed payment to Small Scale and Ancillary Industrial
Undertaking Act Corporate Law : Telangana High Court held that law of
limitation [Limitation Act, 1963] applies even for claims under the Interest
on Delayed Paym... June 18, 2025 33 Views 0 comment Print View All Judiciary
Latest Notifications CBDT Authorizes DGIT (Systems) to Share Tax Data with
MoP&NG; Joint Secretary Income Tax : CBDT has designated DGIT (Systems) as the
authority to share income tax return filing status and income level data with
the Minist... June 18, 2025 54 Views 0 comment Print SEBI Issues Updated
Master Circular for Brokers SEBI : SEBI updates Master Circular for stock
brokers, rescinds earlier directions, and consolidates all guidelines issued
till June 10, ... June 17, 2025 120 Views 0 comment Print 25,000 MT Pharma
Sugar Export Allowed Annually with Authorization DGFT : India's DGFT amends
export policy, permitting 25,000 MT of pharma grade sugar export annually with
specific authorization and co... June 17, 2025 66 Views 0 comment Print NPCI
Mandates Bank Integration for Real-Time PAN-Bank Validation Finance : NPCI
mandates NACH banks to integrate a Real-Time PAN and Bank Account Validation
API for government use, including the Income Tax... June 17, 2025 90 Views 0
comment Print MCA Waives Late Fees for 13 Forms During V3 Upgrade Company Law
: MCA relaxes additional fees for 13 e-forms due to MCA21 V3 migration. Forms
due till July 31 can be filed by August 15, 2025, with... June 17, 2025 5982
Views 0 comment Print View All Notifications Latest Downloads Free Party
Ledger PDF to Excel Convertor GSTR 2B-Books Reconciliation Utility: Free Excel
Tool Free GSTR 2B Combiner Excel Utility Income Tax 2025: Rates, Deductions,
Compliance Chart Changes in ITR for Assessment Year 2025-26 View All Downloads
FAQs RBI FAQs on Master Direction on KYC: Guidelines for Customers & Banks
Explore updated RBI FAQs on KYC, covering account opening, document
requirements, V-CIP, CKYCR, periodic updates, and inoperative accounts for
regulated entities. Read More Legal Metrology FAQs: Footwear & Measurement
Rules Clarifications on Legal Metrology rules for packaged commodities,
including declarations on footwear, retail price symbols, and the
applicability of Section 22 to Feeler Gauges. Read More SEBI releases
Consultation paper on Research Analyst Regulations FAQs SEBI invites public
comments on a draft circular updating FAQs for Research Analysts (RAs),
covering regulatory compliance, trading limits, and disclosure requirements.
Read More Survey on Foreign Liabilities & Assets of Mutual Fund AMCs in India:
FAQs Learn about the RBI’s annual FLA survey for Mutual Funds and AMCs in
India. This survey collects data on foreign liabilities and assets for Balance
of Payments and IIP compilation. Read More RBI FAQs on Coordinated Portfolio
Investment Survey – India Understand the RBI’s Coordinated Portfolio
Investment Survey (CPIS) in India, a semi-annual exercise collecting data on
resident portfolio investment assets abroad for IMF reporting. Learn about
eligible entities, reporting frequency, submission guidelines, and valuation
methods. Read More View All FAQs Subscribe to Our Daily Newsletter Subscribe
Note: By subscribing, you allow us to send you the latest tax news, product
updates, promotional content, and exclusive offers directly to your inbox
Sponsored Latest Posts AO should not have resorted to section 143(1) (a) and
instead could have resorted to section 143 (3): Chhattisgarh HC Section 46 (2)
applicable on Capital Gains Company Liquidation: FMV at Distribution Date as
Cost of Acquisition Upheld Pre-existing dispute between the parties, could not
have been resolved under the Code: NCLAT HC held period of reference couldn’t
be excluded from Limitation u/s 153B if reference was invalid Limitation Act
applies for claims under interest on delayed payment to Small Scale and
Ancillary Industrial Undertaking Act Fling of form 10B before assessment
proceedings is sufficient: Exemption u/s. 11 granted Amount withdrawn as
partner from partnership firm cannot be treated as deemed dividend u/s.
2(22)(e) Addition u/s. 43CA unwarranted as amendment providing tolerance band
of 10% is retrospective in nature Insolvency Petition Filed Against Vishal
Mega Mart Over ₹1.3 Crore Operational Debt Orissa HC Extends GST Appeal
Deadline Amid COVID-19 Pandemic View All Posts Sponsored Featured Posts Delhi
HC Declines to Quash GST Notice Against CA, Trader Over Alleged Fake Firms
Mere Delayed e-way bill generation Not Tax Evasion Intent: Allahabad HC GSTR-1
vs GSTR-3B Mismatch: Direct Recovery Not Warranted- Calcutta HC MCA Waives
Late Fees for 13 Forms During V3 Upgrade NCLT Delhi Rejects CIRP filed with
Intent to Evade Financial Obligations ‘Work Contract’ Label Doesn’t Bar
Section 80IB(10) Deduction if Conditions Are Met: ITAT Cochin ITAT Invalidates
Section 153C Invocation: Distinction Between “Belonging” &
“Pertaining/Relating” Proved Crucial Analysis of Notifications and Circulars
for Week ending 15th June 2025 When Unknown PANs Haunt Your Inbox – How to
Protect Yourself Minimum two independent witnesses needed for premises search
under GST View All Featured Posts Sponsored Trending Posts Allahabad HC Sets
Aside GST Order for Exceeding Demand Beyond Show Cause Notice GST Payer Not
Required to Monitor Portal After Registration Cancellation: Allahabad HC GST
Determination Against Deceased Invalid Without Notice to Legal Representative
ITAT Dismisses Revenue Appeals Below ₹60L Tax Effect, Calls Grounds ‘Cryptic &
Nebulous’ Reopening Assessment for Bogus LTCG/STCG from Shell Company Valid:
Calcutta HC Hardship Compensation during Redevelopment is Non-Taxable Capital
Receipt: ITAT Mumbai Genuineness of Activities Key for 80G Approval, Not Fee
Surplus: ITAT Bangalore Gujarat HC Quashes Income Tax Demand Not Included in
IBC Resolution Plan STT-paid short-term capital loss can be set off against
non-STT STCG: ITAT Mumbai Gross Receipts of Non-Exempt Trust Cannot Be Fully
Taxed: ITAT Mumbai View All Trending Posts Popular Posts June 2025 Tax
Compliance Deadlines for Income Tax and GST GST on Ocean Freight of Export and
Import Empanelment with Punjab & Sind Bank for Concurrent Audit: Last Date
04/06/2025 RBI’s Bold Move: How Repo Rate Cut is Shaping India’s Economy &
Stock Market Tax planning with respect to Dividends CBDT Issues Compulsory
Income Tax Scrutiny Guidelines for FY 2025-26 GST on Rent: Residential &
Commercial Property Taxation Unregistered Sale Agreement Can’t Confer Title
via Subsequent Registration: SC Master Chart on RCM under GST (With Rate and
HSN/SAC) Companies (Accounts) Second Amendment Rules, 2025 Search Post by Date
June 2025 M T W T F S S 1 2345678 9101112131415 16171819202122 23242526272829
30 Latest Tax News & Updates The website www.taxguru.in is dedicated to
providing updates to professionals in the fields of finance and accounting,
including Chartered Accountants, Company Secretaries, Tax Professionals, Cost
Accountants, and other accounting experts. Our aim is to keep these
professionals informed about the latest amendments in various laws, such as
Income Tax, GST, Company Law, ICAI Regulations, FEMA, RBI, IBC 2016, IFSC,
RERA, Customs Duty, Excise, DGFT, SEZ, ICSI Regulations, IRDAI, PMLA, CMA
Regulations, Labour Laws, Corporate Law, Goods and Services Tax, and more.

[SOURCE: https://cleartax.in]
Income Tax Login | Income Tax efiling in India for FY 2024-25 (AY 2025-26) | ClearTax ITR Filing File taxes stress-free. Join 6 million+ satisfied users. Hire an Expert Sit back and get your ITR filed by India's top tax experts Get your ITR personally filed by our seasoned experts for the best savings, completed in just 24 hours. Book Now Self ITR Filing The most seamless and accurate tax filing experience powered by AI Get started with the most seamless ITR filing experience for every tax situation, no matter how complex. Start Now Finance Teams ONE compliance platform powered by new technology, GL Stream Stream your general ledger directly for tax compliance. First time in India, introducing GL Stream Play Video India’s largest tax and financial services platform Explore our wide range of software solutions Taxcloud ITR filing software for Tax Experts ITR filing software for Tax Experts Know more → Enterprise GST, E-Invoicing, Max-ITC, E-Way bill & more GST, E-Invoicing, Max-ITC, E-Way bill & more Know more → Self ITR Filing ITR Filing: Expert Assisted ITR Filing ITR Filing: Expert Assisted ITR Filing Know more → GST software G1-G9 filings made 3x faster G1-G9 filings made 3x faster Know more → Trusted by your favorite brands Numbers don’t lie! Products that perform seamlessly during any kind of surge, so you don’t have to worry about uptime and reliability. Ingest and process any amount of data any time of the month, smoothly. 250M + invoices uploaded 6M + Businesses visible $300B + trade value filled 35,000 + retail investors 6M + tax returns filed For Enterprise For more than ₹50Cr turnover businesses. Explore enterprise-grade stack of GST, e-Invoicing, e-Waybill, Vendor solutions and more. For Individuals For salaried, self employed professionals. File income tax returns in 3 min, invest and grow your wealth, get expert assistance. For SMEs For less than ₹50Crturnover businesses. Explore SME suite including GST, Invoicing and TDS solution along with Clear app. For Tax Experts For tax experts andprofessionals. Explore how tax experts save 2-7% in taxes for their clients with our GST, ITR and TDS suite. Productsfor everyone Built for scale, made by experts and secure by design. Bringing you maximum tax savings, unmatched speed and complete peace of mind. All our products are designed to deliver Maximum tax savings Busineses save upto 2-7% of their net GST with us every month. Individuals can save upto ₹86,500 by filing their tax returns through us. Unparalleled speed Experience 3x faster GST filings, 5x faster invoice reconciliation and 10x faster e-waybill generation. Individuals file their tax returns in under 3 min. Accurate Compliance Our products are designed and tested by in-house tax experts, ensuring every new clause, form or feature is updated and sent to you over the cloud. Looking for expert services? In addition to providing software services, we also offer expert services to help you manage your business and legal compliances. For You ITR Filing Assistance Get Expert assistance in tax filing for Salaried and self-employed individuals, NRIs, Capital gains, and more. TDS on Sale of Property Hassle-free 26QB compliance on sale of property Legal Services For drafting and review of legal documents such as Sale deed, Vendor agreement, Co-founders agreement etc See all services → For Your Business Launch and run a startup Legal drafting, documentation review, change in company name etc. Government registrations Registration for Shop licence, PF, PAN, FSSAI and more Trademark & digital signature Trademark registrations and renewals; Digital signature certificate See all services → Plug and Play An exhaustive portfolio of cloud based products you could use from day one for personal and business compliance Enterprise Tax Expert SMEs Individuals Clear e-Invoicing Fast, dependable and afforable solution ClearE-Waybill 10x faster waybill solution for large businesses ClearGST G1 to G9 filing, 10x faster reconciliations & reports ClearMax ITC End-to-end solution to maximize ITC for businesses ClearVendor Verify, onboard and connect with vendors ClearGST Comprehensive platform for core GST compliance ClearTDS Go-to platform for effortless TDS returns ClearTaxCloud Seamless ITR filing platform for accountants ClearPro App Track filing status from your phone in one click ClearGST From G1 to G9, 3x faster and 2-7% tax savings ClearOne Billing, Payment Collection & Inventory Software File ITR Complete tax returns in under 3 minutes ClearServices Get experts for filing taxes and starting up ClearInvest Save and grow wealth with expert-curated funds Black app More money in your pocket with Black app Your browser does not support HTML video. Designed by experts With our solutions, you don’t have to worry about complying with the latest regulations. 60+ in-house tax experts, co-build and test every product feature. Over 60,000 tax experts give us constant feedback which helps us stay on top of every new tax clause. Committed to security We value your data as if it were ours. All our certifications and licenses, including GSP, were awarded after rigorous scrutiny of our systems and multiple VAPT audits. Encryption Your data is transmitted across SSL certified pathways. We are SOC 2 compliant. Privacy We do not share your or your clients’ data with unaffiliated third parties for their ownpurposes. Data Storage We use ISO 27001 certified data centres, which are quarterly VAPT tested and externally audited. Trusted by experts and businesses ← → Over 5 million tax payers have filed with us I have been using ClearTax’s DIY e-filing of ITR for last 3 years. I use it for my entire family’s income tax returns. Very effective and least time consuming. Mr. Manmohan Tax Payer, Kochi, Kerala FIle ITRs yourself or seek expert assistance → More than 60,000 tax experts use our platform My executives could learn it so quickly and we implemented literally in a couple of days. I am impressed with time-saving features embedded in the software like advanced reconciliation of 2A data with invoices. Mr. Anil Chakravarthy Tax Suite user Explore products for tax experts → 600,000+ businesses trust our SMB offerings Earlier I used to call multiple customers, track my bank account or check messages for payments. Now I can send UPI links in reminders and customers can pay from home. Compliance is easy. Shalini Prasad Business Owner, Printing Goods Explore products for Small Businesses → Over 1,200 enterprises use our compliance stack ClearTax has made core GST returns simple and easy for us. Instead of taking 7 to 8 days to do reconciliation, now it’s just a matter of hours. The people there assist us at any given point in time. Manivannan P Group Manager, Titan Explore our products for Large Enterprises → ← → Press and Awards ← → 2023 Most Preferred Workplace 2023-2024 2023 Excellence in Innovation 2023 2023 Most Trusted Brand of India 2023 2022 Most Innovative Fintech Data Solution Provider 2021 YC Top Companies 2021 FinTech leader of the year 2020 FinTech Scaleup of the year 2020 Top 250 global FinTech startups 2020 BW Disrupt TechTors 2019 Tech leader of the year 2019 FinTech Solution of the year 2019 Emerging FinTech Player ← → Ready to get started? Try for free Schedule a demo → ✕ Request a demo Name Email* Phone number User Category Select your option CA Tax Practitioner Advocate Business less than 50cr Turnover Business greater than 50cr Turnover Student / Teacher I would like to get latest GST & Tax updates on Whatsapp Thank you for your response Our representative will get in touch with you shortly. ✕ Book a demo Please fill in your details and our representative will get in touch with you shortly Name Country Code Phone Number Company Name Company Email Number of invoices Select your option 0-1,000 1,000 - 10,000 10,000-50,000 50,000-5,00,000 >5,00,000 Designation Select your option Chief Financial Officer Head/VP/Director/GM (Finance/ Taxation) Head/VP/Director/GM (Accounts/Audit) Senior Manager (Finance/ Taxation) Senior Manager (Accounts/ Audit) Other Thank you for your response Our representative will get in touch with you shortly. ✕ Expert Assisted ITR Filing To access your ITR filling Top-Tier Tax Experts Live Video Assistance 24-hour Filing Guarantee Maximized Refund Hire a Tax Expert Large Enterprises To access your business solutions GST Max ITC Accounts Payable e‑Invoicing & More Request a demo Get started Frequently Asked Questions Who should file an ITR? An individual whose annual income is more than the basic exemption limit of Rs 2.5 lakh should file an ITR. The basic exemption limit for senior citizens (60 years onwards and less than 80 years) is Rs 3 lakh, and for super senior citizens is Rs 5 lakh. How can I claim deductions for tax saving? You should file an income tax return to claim tax deductions for tax savings such as ELSS, PPF, NSC investments and for payments such as housing loan repayments, insurance premium and donations. I receive my salary income after deduction of TDS. Am I required to file an income tax return? You are required to file an income tax return once your annual income exceeds Rs 2.5 lakh. A deduction of TDS does not replace the requirement to file ITR. While e-filing your ITR, you should furnish the details of your annual income, claim deductions and credit for TDS deducted by your employer. How do I check TDS details from my form 26AS? You can check your Form 26AS from your e-filing login. ClearTax’s e-filing software auto-populates the TDS details from your Form 26AS in your income tax return. How can I claim an income tax refund? You can claim an income tax refund by e-filing your income tax return. An e-filing enables you to claim credit for excess TDS paid and a tax refund. Is my data filed with ClearTax secure? ClearTax uses a 128 bit SSL encryption for transmission of data and enables complete data privacy. Also, ClearTax does not share its data with unaffiliated third parties. What are the GST services offered by ClearTax? ClearTax provides ClearTax GST filing software for accurate GST filing, reconciliation and claiming ITC. ClearTax GST facilitates the generation of e-invoices and e-way bill. How to e-verify my ITR? You can e-verify your ITR within 120 days from the date of filing. You can e-verify using your net banking account or Aadhaar based OTP. A failure to e-verify your ITR can invalidate your ITR filing. How to choose a suitable mutual fund for SIP? You should not select a mutual fund for SIP only by considering the past performance of the fund and fund manager. To choose a suitable mutual fund, you also need to check if the fund’s investment objective is in line with your goals. You can also use our SIP calculator to estimate the return on your mutual fund investments. How does ClearOne invoicing software help small businesses? You can create professional invoices and other business documents easily on mobile app or computer with ClearOne invoicing software. SMEs can also send invoices and payment reminders to customers through WhatsApp and Email with a click of a button. Have queries? Visit our support center Follow us on Have a query? Support Company About us Contact us Careers Media & Press User reviews Engineering blog Clear Library FinTech glossary ClearTax Chronicles GST Product Guides Trust & Safety Cleartax(Saudi Arabia) PRODUCTS Individuals Income Tax e Filing Tax Planning ClearInvestment ClearServices Mutual Funds & ITR e-filing App Mutual Funds Income Tax Filing Income Tax App android Income Tax Secion 80 Deductions Income tax for NRI ClearGST GST GST Login GST software New GST returns e-invoicing Input tax credit Enterprises ClearGST ClearE-Waybill e-Invoicing Software ClearTDS eWay Bill Registration CAs CA partner program ClearGST ClearTDS ClearTaxCloud ClearPro App SMEs ClearGST ClearOne Billing Software Invoicing Software Services for Businesses ClearOne App ClearServices Tax filing for professionals Tax filing for traders Clear Launchpad Trademark Registration Company Registration TDS returns MSME Registration HSN Lookup HSN Code Finder Cement HSN Code Transport HSN Code Plastic HSN Code Cloth GST Rate Books GST Rate RESOURCES & GUIDES GST Resources GST Registration GST Returns GST Procedure GST News & Announcement GSTR 9 Annual Returns GST Payments and Refunds Invoicing Under GST GSTR-2B GSTR-3B ITR Resources Income Tax Slab Form 26AS What is Form 16 Salary Income How to File TDS Returns New Income Tax Portal Incometax.gov.in Income From Selling Shares Income Tax Due Dates Mutual Fund Resources How to Invest in Mutual Funds Mutual fund Types ELSS SIP Mutual Funds Hedge Funds Debt Funds NFO What is AMFI What is NAV Business Resources Memorandum of Understanding ( MoU ) Mudra Yojana Inflation & Deflation Loan Agreement Succession Certificate Solvency Certificate Debt Settlement Agreement Rental Agreement Letters Of Credit TOOLS Income tax calculator EMI Calculator Mutual fund calculator HSN Code Finder SIP calculator GST calculator PPF Calculator GST number search IFSC Code Search Generate rent receipts Home Loan EMI Calculator NPS Calculator HRA calculator RD Calculator FD Calculator Gold Rates Today Currency Converter Compound Interest Calculator Find HSN code Tax Saving Calculator Get IT refund status Salary Calculator EPF Calculator GST Number Search by Name TRENDING MUTUAL FUNDS ICICI Prudential Technology Fund Direct Plan Growth Tata Digital India Fund Direct Growth Axis Bluechip Fund Growth ICICI Prudential Technology Fund Growth Aditya Birla Sun Life Tax Relief 96 Growth Aditya Birla Sun Life Digital India Fund Direct Plan Growth Quant Tax Plan Growth Option Direct Plan SBI Technology Opportunities Fund Direct Growth Axis Long Term Equity Fund Growth TOP AMCS SBI Mutual Fund Nippon India mutual fund HDFC Mutual Fund UTI mutual fund Kotak Mahindra Mutual Fund ICICI Prudential Mutual Fund Aditya Birla Mutual Fund Axis mutual fund STOCK MARKETS Stock Market Live Yes Bank Share Price SBI Share Price IRCTC Share Price ITC Share Price TCS Share Price Tata Motors Share Price Infosys Share Price Idea Share Price HDFC Bank Share Price BEST FUNDS Best Mutual Funds Best Tax Savings Mutual Funds Best Index Funds Best Equity Mutual Funds Clear offers taxation & financial solutions to individuals, businesses, organizations & chartered accountants in India. Clear serves 1.5+ Million happy customers, 20000+ CAs & tax experts & 10000+ businesses across India. Efiling Income Tax Returns(ITR) is made easy with Clear platform. Just upload your form 16, claim your deductions and get your acknowledgment number online. You can efile income tax return on your income from salary, house property, capital gains, business & profession and income from other sources. Further you can also file TDS returns, generate Form-16, use our Tax Calculator software, claim HRA, check refund status and generate rent receipts for Income Tax Filing. CAs, experts and businesses can get GST ready with Clear GST software & certification course. Our GST Software helps CAs, tax experts & business to manage returns & invoices in an easy manner. Our Goods & Services Tax course includes tutorial videos, guides and expert assistance to help you in mastering Goods and Services Tax. Clear can also help you in getting your business registered for Goods & Services Tax Law. Save taxes with Clear by investing in tax saving mutual funds (ELSS) online. Our experts suggest the best funds and you can get high returns by investing directly or through SIP. Download Black by ClearTax App to file returns from your mobile phone. CLEARTAX IS A PRODUCT BY DEFMACRO SOFTWARE PVT. LTD. Privacy Policy Terms of use ISO 27001 Data Center SSL Certified Site 128-bit encryption Terms - ITR Terms - Financial Products & GST Privacy - ITR Privacy - Financial Products & GST Legal - Defmacro Legal - Xpedize ✕ Looking for a business loan Name* Phone number* City* Purpose of loan * Select your option Supplier payment Employee salaries Loan repayment Machinery purchase Auto loan Personal loan Business Advance Other Annual turnover - In lacs Current financing/loan channels* Select your option Bank (E.g, HDFC bank) NBFC (Eg., BajaJ finance) Money lenders Friends & family Other Current interest rate (%)* GST registered What is your business * Thank you for your interest, our team will get back to you shortly

[SOURCE: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Income_tax_in_India]
Income tax in India - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia Form of taxation in India This article needs additional citations
for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to
reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find
sources: "Income tax in India" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR
(April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this message) Income Tax Department
logo Part of a series onTaxation An aspect of fiscal policy Policies Economic
justice Government revenue Property tax equalization Tax revenue Non-tax
revenue Tax law Tax bracket Flat tax Tax threshold Taxation as theft Tax shift
Tax cut Tax advantage Tax incentive Tax reform Tax harmonization Tax
competition Double taxation Representation Medical savings account Economics
General Theory Price effect Excess burden Tax efficiency Tax incidence Laffer
curve Optimal tax Fiscal illusion Theories Optimal capital income taxation
Distribution of Tax Tax rate Flat Progressive Regressive Proportional
Collection Revenue service Revenue stamp Tax assessment Taxable income Tax
lien Tax refund Tax shield Tax residence Tax preparation Tax protester Tax
investigation Tax collector Tax withholding Private tax collection
Noncompliance Legal tax avoidance Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS)
Double Irish Single Malt CAIA Dutch Sandwich Estate planning Fuel dye
Repatriation tax avoidance Share repurchase Tariff engineering Tax credit Tax
deduction Tax exemption Taxpayer groups Tax holiday Tax inversion Tax farming
Tax patent Tax shelter Illegal tax evasion Tax amnesty Black market Debtors'
prison Tax exile Smuggling Tax resistance Transfer mispricing Unreported
employment Locations Tax havens Corporate havens Offshore financial centres
(OFCs) Offshore magic circle Conduit and sink OFCs Financial centres Financial
Secrecy Index Major examples Ireland as a tax haven Ireland v. Commission
Leprechaun economics Liechtenstein tax affair Luxembourg Leaks Offshore Leaks
Paradise Papers Panama Papers Swiss Leaks United States as a tax haven Panama
as a tax haven Types Direct Indirect Per unit Ad valorem Aviation Airport
improvement Landing Solidarity Capital gains Expatriation Consumption
Departure Hotel Sales Stamp Television Tourist Value-added Digital goods
Dividend Environmental tax Carbon Eco-tariff Landfill Natural resources
consumption Severance Steering Stumpage Excise Alcohol Cigarette Fat Meat Sin
Sugary drink Tobacco General Georgist Gift Gross receipts Hidden Hypothecated
Income Inheritance (estate) Land value Luxury Payroll Pigouvian Property
Resource rent Single Stealth Surtax Turnover Use User charge/fee Congestion
Fuel Road/GNSS Toll Vehicle miles traveled Corporate profit Excess profits
Windfall Negative (income) Wealth International Financial transaction tax
ATTAC Currency transaction tax European Union Common Consolidated Corporate
Tax Base (CCCTB) Global minimum corporate tax rate Robin Hood tax Tobin tax
Spahn tax Tax equalization Tax treaty Exchange of Information Permanent
establishment Transfer pricing European Union FTT Foreign revenue rule Trade
Custom Duty Tariff Import Export Tariff war Free trade Free-trade zone Trade
agreement ATA Carnet Research Academic Mihir A. Desai Dhammika Dharmapala
James R. Hines Jr. Ronen Palan Joel Slemrod Gabriel Zucman Advocacy groups
Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) Oxfam (UK) Tax Foundation
(US) Tax Justice Network (TJN) Tax Policy Center (US) Religious Church tax
Eight per thousand Teind Tithe Fiscus Judaicus Leibzoll Temple tax Tolerance
tax Jizya Kharaj Khums Nisab Zakat By country All Countries List of countries
by tax rates Tax revenue to GDP ratio Tax rates in Europe Individual Countries
Albania Algeria Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan
Brazil Bulgaria BVI Canada China Colombia Croatia Denmark Finland France
Germany Greece Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy
Japan Kazakhstan Lithuania Malta Morocco Namibia Netherlands New Zealand
Norway Pakistan Palestine Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Russia South Africa
Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania United Arab Emirates United
Kingdom United States Uruguay Business portal Money portalvte Central Revenue
collections in 2007–08[1] Personal income tax 7.43 (5.23%) Corporate taxes
45.99 (32.3%) Other taxes 1.83 (1.29%) Excise taxes 35.84 (25.2%) Customs
duties 17.46 (12.3%) Other taxes 1.68 (1.18%) other taxes 31.96 (22.5%) Income
tax in India is governed by Entry 82 of the Union List of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution of India, empowering the central government to tax non-
agricultural income; agricultural income is defined in Section 10(1) of the
Income-tax Act, 1961.[2] The income-tax law consists of the 1961 act, Income
Tax Rules 1962, Notifications and Circulars issued by the Central Board of
Direct Taxes (CBDT), annual Finance Acts, and judicial pronouncements by the
Supreme and high courts of India. The government taxes certain income of
individuals, Hindu Undivided Families (HUF's), companies, firms, LLPs,
associations, bodies, local authorities and any other juridical person.
Personal tax depends on residential status. The CBDT administers the Income
Tax Department, which is part of the Ministry of Finance's Department of
Revenue. Income tax is a key source of government funding. The Income Tax
Department is the central government's largest revenue generator; the total
tax revenue increased from ₹1,392.26 billion (US$16 billion) in 1997–98 to
₹5,889.09 billion (US$70 billion) in 2007–08.[3][4] In 2018–19, direct tax
collection reported by the CBDT was about ₹11.17 lakh crore (₹11.17
trillion).[5] History[edit] Ancient times[edit] Taxation has been a function
of sovereign states since ancient times. The earliest archaeological evidence
of taxation in India is found in Ashoka's pillar inscription at Lumbini.
According to the inscription, tax relief was given to the people of Lumbini
(who paid one-eighth of their income, instead of one-sixth).[6] In the
Manusmriti, Manu says that the king has the sovereign power to levy and
collect tax according to Shastra:[7] लोके च करादिग्रहणो शास्त्रनिष्ठः स्यात् ।
— Manu, Sloka 128, Manusmriti[7] ("It is in accordance with Sastra to collect
taxes from citizens.") The Baudhayana sutras note that the king received one-
sixth of the income from his subjects, in return for protection.[7] According
to Kautilya's Arthashastra (a treatise on economics, the art of governance and
foreign policy), artha is not only wealth; a government's power depended on
the strength of its treasury: "From the treasury comes the power of the
government, and the earth, whose ornament is the treasury, is acquired by
means of the treasury and army." Kalidasa's Raghuvamsha, eulogizing King
Dilipa, says: "it was only for the good of his subjects that he collected
taxes from them just as the sun draws moisture from the earth to give it back
a thousand time."[8] 19th and early 20th centuries[edit] British rule in India
became established during the 19th century. After the Mutiny of 1857, the
British government faced an acute financial crisis. To fill the treasury, the
first Income-tax Act was introduced in February 1860 by James Wilson (British
India's first finance minister).[8] The act received the assent of the Viceroy
on 24 July 1860, and came into effect immediately. It was divided into 21
parts, with 259 sections. Income was classified in four schedules: i) income
from landed property; ii) income from professions and trade; iii) income from
securities, annuities and dividends, and iv) income from salaries and
pensions. Agricultural income was taxable.[8] A number of laws were enacted to
streamline the income-tax laws; the Super-Rich Tax and a new Income-tax Act
were passed in 1918. The Act of 1922 significantly changed the Act of 1918 by
shifting income-tax administration from the provincial to the central
government. Another notable feature of the act was that the rules would be
outlined by annual Finance Acts instead of the act itself.[9] A new Income-tax
Act was passed in 1939. Present day[edit] The 1922 act was amended twenty-nine
times between 1939 and 1956. A tax on capital gains was imposed in 1946, and
the concept of capital gains has been amended a number of times.[9] In 1956,
Nicholas Kaldor was appointed to investigate the Indian tax system in light of
the Second Five-Year Plan's revenue requirement. He submitted an extensive
report for a coordinated tax system, and several taxation acts were enacted:
the wealth-tax Act 1957, the Expenditure Tax Act, 1957, and the Gift Tax Act,
1958.[9] The Direct Taxes Administration Enquiry Committee, under the
chairmanship of Mahavir Tyagi, submitted its report on 30 November 1959 and
its recommendations took shape in the Income-tax Act, 1961. The act, which
became effective on 1 April 1962, replaced the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922.
Current income-tax law is governed by the 1961 act, which has 298 sections and
fourteen schedules.[9] The Direct Taxes Code Bill was sponsored in Parliament
on 30 August 2010 by the finance minister to replace the Income Tax Act, 1961
and the Wealth Tax Act.[10] The bill could not pass, however, and lapsed after
revocation of the Wealth Tax Act in 2015. Amnesty[edit] In its income
declaration scheme, 2016, the government of India allowed taxpayers to declare
previously-undisclosed income and pay a one-time 45-percent tax. Declarations
totaled 64,275, netting ₹652.5 billion (US$7.7 billion).[11] New Tax
Regime[edit] The New Tax Regime was announced for individuals & HUF in Budget
2020 and became effective from financial year 2020-21. According to it,
individuals can opt for reduced tax rates with no option for claiming
exemptions & deductions. Currently, Indian taxpayers can choose between the
old tax regime and the new tax regime.[12] At the time of introduction, it had
7 different slabs. After three years from introduction, Indian Government
reduced both the slab count & tax rates under New Tax Regime in Budget 2023,
after reports of poor adoption to new tax regime by tax payers[13] Tax
brackets[edit] For the assessment year 2013–25, individuals earning up to ₹2.5
lakh (US$3,000) were exempt from income tax.[14] About one percent of the
population, the upper class, falls under the 30-percent slab. It increased by
an average of 22 percent from 2000 to 2010, encompassing 580,000 income-tax
payers. The common man, who fall under the 10- and 20-percent slabs, grew by
an average of seven percent annually to 2.78 million income-tax payers.[15]
Agricultural income[edit] According to section 10(1) of the Act, agricultural
income is tax-exempt. Section 2(1A) defines agricultural income as: Rent or
revenue derived from land in India which is used for agricultural purposes
Income derived from such land by agricultural operations, including the
processing of agricultural produce, raised or received as rent-in-kind, for
the market or for sale Income attributable to a farm house, subject to
conditions Income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery Mixed
agricultural and business income[edit] Income in the activities below is
initially computed as business income, after permissible deductions.
Thereafter, 40, 35 or 25 percent of the income is treated as business income
and the rest is treated as agricultural income. Income Business income
Agricultural income Growing and manufacturing tea in India 40% 60% Sale of
latex, latex-based crepe or brown crepe manufactured from field latex or
coalgum obtained from rubber plants grown by a seller in India 35% 65% Sale of
coffee grown and cured by an Indian seller 25% 75% Sale of coffee grown,
cured, roasted and ground by an Indian seller 40% 60% Deductions[edit] These
are permissible deductions according to the Finance Act, 2015: §80C – Up to ₹
150,000: Provident and Voluntary Provident Funds (VPF) Public Provident Fund
(PPF) Life-insurance premiums Equity-Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS) Home-loan
principal repayment Stamp duty and registration fees for a home Sukanya
Samriddhi Account National Savings Certificate (NSC) (VIII Issue)
Infrastructure bonds §80CCC – Life Insurance Corporation annuity premiums up
to ₹ 150,000 §80CCD – Employee pension contributions, up to 10 percent of
salary §80CCG – Rajiv Gandhi Equity Savings Scheme, 2013: 50 percent of
investment or ₹25,000 (whichever is lower), up to ₹ 50,000 §80D – Medical-
insurance premium, up to ₹ 25,000 for self/family and up to ₹ 15,000 for
parents (up to ₹ 50,000 for senior citizens); premium cannot be paid in cash.
§80DD – Expenses for medical treatment (including nursing), training and
rehabilitation of a permanently-disabled dependent, up to ₹ 75,000 (₹ 1,25,000
for a severe disability, as defined by law) §80DDB – Medical expenses, up to ₹
40,000 (₹ 100,000 for senior citizens) §80E – Student-loan interest §80EE –
Home-loan interest (up to 100,000 on a loan up to ₹ 2.5 million) §80G –
Charitable contributions (50 or 100 percent) §80GG – Rent minus 10 percent of
income, up to ₹ 5,000 per month or 25 percent of income (whatever is less)[16]
§80TTA – Interest on savings, up to ₹ 10,000 §80TTB – Time deposit interest
for senior citizens, up to ₹ 50,000 80U – Certified-disability deduction (₹
75,000; ₹ 125,000 for a severe disability) §87A – Rebate (up to ₹ 12,500) for
individuals with income up to ₹ 5,00,000 80RRB – Certified royalties on a
patent registered on or after 1 April 2003, up to ₹ 300,000 §80QQB – Certified
book royalties (except textbooks), up to ₹ 300,000 Due dates[edit] The due
date for a return is: 31 October of the assessment year - Companies without
international transactions, entities requiring auditing, or partners of an
audited firm 30 November - Companies without international transactions 31
July – All other filers Individuals with an income of less than ₹500,000 (less
than ₹10,000 of which is from interest) who have not changed jobs are exempt
from income tax.[17] Although individual and HUF taxpayers must file their
income-tax returns online, digital signatures are not required.[17] Advance
tax[edit] The practice of paying taxes in advance rather than in a single sum
at the end of the fiscal year is known as advance tax. These taxes, often
known as the 'pay-as-you-earn' scheme, is paid on tax bills above ₹10,000 in
installments instead of as a lump sum. The schedule of advance tax payment for
individual and corporate taxpayers are: On or before 15 June – 15 percent of
advance tax liability On or before 15 September – 45 percent of advance tax
liability On or before 15 December – 75 percent of advance tax liability On or
before 15 March – 100 percent of advance tax liability Amendments due to
COVID-19[edit] There was no change in the timeline for tax payment; however,
if the deposit of Advance Tax is delayed, a reduced interest rate of 9 percent
per annum, or 0.75 percent per month,[18] will be applicable instead of the
current rate of 12 percent per annum, or 1 percent, for payment of all taxes
falling between 20 March 2020 and 30 June 2020. Tax deduction at source[edit]
Income tax is also paid by tax deduction at source (TDS): Section Payment TDS
threshold TDS 192 Salary Exemption limit As specified in Part III of I
Schedule 193 Interest on securities Subject to provisions 10% 194A Other
interest Banks – ₹10,000 (under age 60); ₹ 50,000 (over 60). All other
interest – ₹5,000 10% 194B Lottery winnings ₹10,000 30% 194BB Horse-racing
winnings ₹10,000 30% 194C Payment to resident contractors ₹30,000 (single
contract); ₹100,000 (multiple contracts) 2% (companies); 1% otherwise 194D
Insurance commission ₹15,000 5% (individual), 10% (domestic companies) 194DA
Life-insurance payment ₹100,000 1% 194E Payment to non-resident sportsmen or
sports association Not applicable 20% 194EE Payment of deposit under National
Savings Scheme ₹2,500 10% 194F Repurchase of unit by Mutual Fund or Unit Trust
of India Not applicable 20% 194G Commission on sale of lottery tickets ₹15,000
5% 194H Brokerage commission ₹15,000 2% 194-I Rents ₹180,000 2% (plant,
machinery, equipment), 10% (land, building, furniture) 194IA Purchase of
immovable property ₹5,000,000 1% 194IB Rent by individual or HUF not liable to
tax audit ₹50,000 5% 194J Professional or technical services, royalties
₹30,000 10% 194LA Compensation on acquisition of certain immovable property
₹250,000 10% 194LB Interest paid by Infrastructure Development Fund under
section 10(47) to non-resident or foreign company – 5% 194LC Interest paid by
Indian company or business trust on money borrowed in foreign currency under a
loan agreement or long-term bonds – 5% 195 Interest or other amounts paid to
non-residents or a foreign company (except under §115O) As computed by
assessing officer on application under §195(2) or 195(3) Avoiding double
taxation Corporate tax[edit] Number of corporate taxpayers by income The tax
rate is 25 percent for domestic companies. For new companies incorporated
after 1 October 2019 and beginning production before 31 March 2023, the tax
rate is 15 percent. Both rates apply only if a company claims no exemptions or
concessions. For foreign companies, the tax rate is 40 percent (50 percent on
royalties and technical services). Surcharges and cesses, including a four-
percent health-and-education cess, are levied on the flat rate.[19] Electronic
filing is mandatory.[20] Surcharges[edit] Non-corporate taxpayers pay a
10-percent surcharge on income between ₹ 5 million and ₹ 10 million. There is
a 15-percent surcharge on income over ₹ 10 million. Domestic companies pay
seven percent on taxable income between ₹ 10 million and ₹ 100 million, and 12
percent on income over ₹ 100 million. Foreign companies pay two percent on
income between ₹ 10 million and ₹ 100 million, and five percent on income over
₹ 100 million. Tax returns[edit] There are four types of income-tax returns:
Normal return (§139(1)) – Individuals with an income above ₹ 250,000 (under
age 60), ₹ 300,000 (age 60 years to 79 years), or ₹ 500,000 (over 80) must
file a return. Due dates vary. A belated return, under §139(4), may be filed
before the end of the assessment year. A revised return, under §139(5), may be
filed for a normal or belated return by the end of the assessment year. An
assessing officer may flag a defective return under §139(9). Defects must be
rectified by the taxpayer within 15 days of notification. Annual information
return and statements[edit] Those responsible for registering or maintaining
accounting books or other documents with a record of any specified financial
transaction[21] must file an annual information return (Form No. 61A).
Producers of a cinematographic film during the financial year must file a
statement (Form No. 52A) within 30 days of the end of the financial year or
within 30 days of the end of production, whichever is earlier. Non-residents
with a liaison office in India must deliver Form No. 49A to the assessing
officer within sixty days of the end of the financial year. Finance Act,
2021[edit] In the Finance Act, 2021, the government has introduced the
following changes on the Income Tax Act, 1961: Amendments for taxation of
income arising from Firm/AOP/BOI; Increased tax Incentives for International
Finance Service Centre; Denial of depreciation on Goodwill; Full value of
consideration for computation of capital gains on slump sale to be at Fair
Value; Enhancement of Limit for Tax Audit; and Definition of the word "Liable
to Tax" is introduced. Assessment[edit] Self-assessment is done on a
taxpayer's return. The department assesses tax under section 143(3)
(scrutiny), 144 (best judgement), 147 (income escaping assessment) and 153A
(search and seizure). Notices for such assessments are issued under sections
143(2), 148 and 153A, respectively. Time limits are prescribed in section
153.[22] Penalties[edit] Penalties can be levied under §271(1)(c)[23] for
concealing or misrepresenting income. Penalties may range from 100 to 300
percent of the tax evaded. Under-reporting or misreporting income is penalized
under §270A. Penalties are 50 percent of the tax on under-reported income and
200 percent of the tax on misreported income. Late fees are payable under
§234F. New Direct Tax Code[edit] In the budget 2025, tabled by the Finance
Minister on 01.02.2025, the FM affirmed and said that the new direct tax code
will be presented in the coming weak replacing Income Tax Act, 1961.[24] The
union cabinet on 07.02.2025 cleared the new Income Tax Bill to replace the old
Income Tax Act, 1961 from April 1, 2026.[25] See also[edit] Taxation in India
References[edit] ^ Compiled from Comptroller and Auditor General of India
reports. ^ Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (2011). Taxation. ISBN
978-81-8441-290-1. ^ "Growth of Income Tax revenue in India" (PDF). Archived
(PDF) from the original on 27 February 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2012. ^
"Home – Central Board of Direct Taxes, Government of India".
Incometaxindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 2 December 2015.
Retrieved 18 April 2018. ^ "Total direct tax collections for FY18-19 fall
short by Rs 83,000 crore". Moneycontrol.com. 2 April 2019. Archived from the
original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020. ^ Hultzsch, E. (1925).
Inscriptions of Asoka. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 164–165 ^ a b c Jha S M
(1990). "Taxation and Indian Economy". New Delhi: Deep and Deep
Publications.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) CS1
maint: publisher location (link) ^ a b c "The evolution of income-tax".
thehindubusinessline.com. Archived from the original on 4 August 2019.
Retrieved 4 August 2019. ^ a b c d "Evolution of Income Tax System in India"
(PDF). Shodhganga. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 July 2020. Retrieved
4 August 2019. ^ "Impact of DTC on India Inc", The Hindu Business Line, 6
September 2010 ^ "Black money haul: Rs 65,250 crore collected through Income
Declaration Scheme", The Economic Times, 1 October 2016, archived from the
original on 4 October 2016, retrieved 1 October 2016 ^ "Union Budget 2023: New
vs Old Tax Regime - See What Has Changed". NDTV.com. Archived from the
original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2023. ^ "Why hasn't the new
tax regime taken off?". The Times of India. 24 January 2023. Archived from the
original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2023. ^ "All you need to
know about Income Tax Returns for AY 2016–17", Daily News and Analysis, 16
April 2016, archived from the original on 20 April 2025, retrieved 24 April
2013 ^ Santosh Tiwari. "Evasion of personal tax dips to 59% of mop-up". The
Financial Express. Archived from the original on 19 April 2014. Retrieved 19
April 2014. ^ "Tax Laws & Rules > Acts > Income-tax Act, 1961".
www.incometaxindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 10 May 2018.
Retrieved 1 November 2019. ^ a b "E-Filing is mandatory Income is more than 5
lacs". CA club india. Archived from the original on 29 June 2013. Retrieved 14
July 2013. ^ "Tax relief for industries affected by Coronavirus". pib.gov.in.
Archived from the original on 27 June 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2021. ^ "Income
Tax rates for Companies". businesssetup.in. Archived from the original on 18
May 2015. Retrieved 12 May 2015. ^ "Corporate taxpayers must file
electronically, point 4 of I T circular" (PDF). Archived from the original
(PDF) on 4 January 2007. Retrieved 22 November 2006. ^ "Annual Information
return". Archived from the original on 25 August 2012. Retrieved 17 September
2012. ^ Kumar, Kuldip (27 March 2016), "Readers' Corner: Taxation", Business
Standard, archived from the original on 6 May 2016, retrieved 24 April 2016 ^
"Section 271 of India IT Act". Archived from the original on 14 October 2013.
Retrieved 17 September 2012. ^ "New income tax bill expected to be presented
in Parliament next week, finance secy says it won't have any new taxes".
economic times. ^ "Cabinet clears new income tax bill, likely to be tabled in
Lok Sabha Monday: Sources". India Today. 7 February 2025. Retrieved 8 February
2025. External links[edit] Official website Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Income_tax_in_India&oldid;=1296021426"
Categories: Income tax in IndiaIncome taxesHidden categories: Pages with non-
numeric formatnum argumentsCS1 maint: numeric names: authors listCS1 maint:
publisher locationArticles with short descriptionShort description is
different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from April
2016All articles needing additional referencesUse Indian English from
September 2013All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates
from October 2020 Search Search Income tax in India 4 languages Add topic

[SOURCE: https://indiacode.nic.in]
India Code: Home India Code Logo has been Modified, Click here to Download for
updating the Logo in your Website. India Code Search Hint : Type your keyword
in box below, you can filter your query in advance search for precise result.
Go! All Acts Sections Subordinate Legislations Income-tax and Other Direct
Taxes Ok Cancel For specific search, please select the following :- Rules
Regulations Notifications Orders Ordinances Statutes Circulars