Income tax in India - Wikipedia Jump to content From Wikipedia, the free
encyclopedia Form of taxation in India This article needs additional citations
for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to
reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed.Find
sources: "Income tax in India" – news · newspapers · books · scholar · JSTOR
(April 2016) (Learn how and when to remove this message) Income Tax Department
logo Part of a series onTaxation An aspect of fiscal policy Policies Economic
justice Government revenue Property tax equalization Tax revenue Non-tax
revenue Tax law Tax bracket Flat tax Tax threshold Taxation as theft Tax shift
Tax cut Tax advantage Tax incentive Tax reform Tax harmonization Tax
competition Double taxation Representation Medical savings account Economics
General Theory Price effect Excess burden Tax efficiency Tax incidence Laffer
curve Optimal tax Fiscal illusion Theories Optimal capital income taxation
Distribution of Tax Tax rate Flat Progressive Regressive Proportional
Collection Revenue service Revenue stamp Tax assessment Taxable income Tax
lien Tax refund Tax shield Tax residence Tax preparation Tax protester Tax
investigation Tax collector Tax withholding Private tax collection
Noncompliance Legal tax avoidance Base erosion and profit shifting (BEPS)
Double Irish Single Malt CAIA Dutch Sandwich Estate planning Fuel dye
Repatriation tax avoidance Share repurchase Tariff engineering Tax credit Tax
deduction Tax exemption Taxpayer groups Tax holiday Tax inversion Tax farming
Tax patent Tax shelter Illegal tax evasion Tax amnesty Black market Debtors'
prison Tax exile Smuggling Tax resistance Transfer mispricing Unreported
employment Locations Tax havens Corporate havens Offshore financial centres
(OFCs) Offshore magic circle Conduit and sink OFCs Financial centres Financial
Secrecy Index Major examples Ireland as a tax haven Ireland v. Commission
Leprechaun economics Liechtenstein tax affair Luxembourg Leaks Offshore Leaks
Paradise Papers Panama Papers Swiss Leaks United States as a tax haven Panama
as a tax haven Types Direct Indirect Per unit Ad valorem Aviation Airport
improvement Landing Solidarity Capital gains Expatriation Consumption
Departure Hotel Sales Stamp Television Tourist Value-added Digital goods
Dividend Environmental tax Carbon Eco-tariff Landfill Natural resources
consumption Severance Steering Stumpage Excise Alcohol Cigarette Fat Meat Sin
Sugary drink Tobacco General Georgist Gift Gross receipts Hidden Hypothecated
Income Inheritance (estate) Land value Luxury Payroll Pigouvian Property
Resource rent Single Stealth Surtax Turnover Use User charge/fee Congestion
Fuel Road/GNSS Toll Vehicle miles traveled Corporate profit Excess profits
Windfall Negative (income) Wealth International Financial transaction tax
ATTAC Currency transaction tax European Union Common Consolidated Corporate
Tax Base (CCCTB) Global minimum corporate tax rate Robin Hood tax Tobin tax
Spahn tax Tax equalization Tax treaty Exchange of Information Permanent
establishment Transfer pricing European Union FTT Foreign revenue rule Trade
Custom Duty Tariff Import Export Tariff war Free trade Free-trade zone Trade
agreement ATA Carnet Research Academic Mihir A. Desai Dhammika Dharmapala
James R. Hines Jr. Ronen Palan Joel Slemrod Gabriel Zucman Advocacy groups
Institute on Taxation and Economic Policy (ITEP) Oxfam (UK) Tax Foundation
(US) Tax Justice Network (TJN) Tax Policy Center (US) Religious Church tax
Eight per thousand Teind Tithe Fiscus Judaicus Leibzoll Temple tax Tolerance
tax Jizya Kharaj Khums Nisab Zakat By country All Countries List of countries
by tax rates Tax revenue to GDP ratio Tax rates in Europe Individual Countries
Albania Algeria Argentina Armenia Australia Azerbaijan Bangladesh Bhutan
Brazil Bulgaria BVI Canada China Colombia Croatia Denmark Finland France
Germany Greece Hong Kong Iceland India Indonesia Iran Ireland Israel Italy
Japan Kazakhstan Lithuania Malta Morocco Namibia Netherlands New Zealand
Norway Pakistan Palestine Peru Philippines Poland Portugal Russia South Africa
Sri Lanka Sweden Switzerland Taiwan Tanzania United Arab Emirates United
Kingdom United States Uruguay Business portal Money portalvte Central Revenue
collections in 2007–08[1] Personal income tax 7.43 (5.23%) Corporate taxes
45.99 (32.3%) Other taxes 1.83 (1.29%) Excise taxes 35.84 (25.2%) Customs
duties 17.46 (12.3%) Other taxes 1.68 (1.18%) other taxes 31.96 (22.5%) Income
tax in India is governed by Entry 82 of the Union List of the Seventh Schedule
to the Constitution of India, empowering the central government to tax non-
agricultural income; agricultural income is defined in Section 10(1) of the
Income-tax Act, 1961.[2] The income-tax law consists of the 1961 act, Income
Tax Rules 1962, Notifications and Circulars issued by the Central Board of
Direct Taxes (CBDT), annual Finance Acts, and judicial pronouncements by the
Supreme and high courts of India. The government taxes certain income of
individuals, Hindu Undivided Families (HUF's), companies, firms, LLPs,
associations, bodies, local authorities and any other juridical person.
Personal tax depends on residential status. The CBDT administers the Income
Tax Department, which is part of the Ministry of Finance's Department of
Revenue. Income tax is a key source of government funding. The Income Tax
Department is the central government's largest revenue generator; the total
tax revenue increased from ₹1,392.26 billion (US$16 billion) in 1997–98 to
₹5,889.09 billion (US$70 billion) in 2007–08.[3][4] In 2018–19, direct tax
collection reported by the CBDT was about ₹11.17 lakh crore (₹11.17
trillion).[5] History[edit] Ancient times[edit] Taxation has been a function
of sovereign states since ancient times. The earliest archaeological evidence
of taxation in India is found in Ashoka's pillar inscription at Lumbini.
According to the inscription, tax relief was given to the people of Lumbini
(who paid one-eighth of their income, instead of one-sixth).[6] In the
Manusmriti, Manu says that the king has the sovereign power to levy and
collect tax according to Shastra:[7] लोके च करादिग्रहणो शास्त्रनिष्ठः स्यात् ।
— Manu, Sloka 128, Manusmriti[7] ("It is in accordance with Sastra to collect
taxes from citizens.") The Baudhayana sutras note that the king received one-
sixth of the income from his subjects, in return for protection.[7] According
to Kautilya's Arthashastra (a treatise on economics, the art of governance and
foreign policy), artha is not only wealth; a government's power depended on
the strength of its treasury: "From the treasury comes the power of the
government, and the earth, whose ornament is the treasury, is acquired by
means of the treasury and army." Kalidasa's Raghuvamsha, eulogizing King
Dilipa, says: "it was only for the good of his subjects that he collected
taxes from them just as the sun draws moisture from the earth to give it back
a thousand time."[8] 19th and early 20th centuries[edit] British rule in India
became established during the 19th century. After the Mutiny of 1857, the
British government faced an acute financial crisis. To fill the treasury, the
first Income-tax Act was introduced in February 1860 by James Wilson (British
India's first finance minister).[8] The act received the assent of the Viceroy
on 24 July 1860, and came into effect immediately. It was divided into 21
parts, with 259 sections. Income was classified in four schedules: i) income
from landed property; ii) income from professions and trade; iii) income from
securities, annuities and dividends, and iv) income from salaries and
pensions. Agricultural income was taxable.[8] A number of laws were enacted to
streamline the income-tax laws; the Super-Rich Tax and a new Income-tax Act
were passed in 1918. The Act of 1922 significantly changed the Act of 1918 by
shifting income-tax administration from the provincial to the central
government. Another notable feature of the act was that the rules would be
outlined by annual Finance Acts instead of the act itself.[9] A new Income-tax
Act was passed in 1939. Present day[edit] The 1922 act was amended twenty-nine
times between 1939 and 1956. A tax on capital gains was imposed in 1946, and
the concept of capital gains has been amended a number of times.[9] In 1956,
Nicholas Kaldor was appointed to investigate the Indian tax system in light of
the Second Five-Year Plan's revenue requirement. He submitted an extensive
report for a coordinated tax system, and several taxation acts were enacted:
the wealth-tax Act 1957, the Expenditure Tax Act, 1957, and the Gift Tax Act,
1958.[9] The Direct Taxes Administration Enquiry Committee, under the
chairmanship of Mahavir Tyagi, submitted its report on 30 November 1959 and
its recommendations took shape in the Income-tax Act, 1961. The act, which
became effective on 1 April 1962, replaced the Indian Income Tax Act, 1922.
Current income-tax law is governed by the 1961 act, which has 298 sections and
fourteen schedules.[9] The Direct Taxes Code Bill was sponsored in Parliament
on 30 August 2010 by the finance minister to replace the Income Tax Act, 1961
and the Wealth Tax Act.[10] The bill could not pass, however, and lapsed after
revocation of the Wealth Tax Act in 2015. Amnesty[edit] In its income
declaration scheme, 2016, the government of India allowed taxpayers to declare
previously-undisclosed income and pay a one-time 45-percent tax. Declarations
totaled 64,275, netting ₹652.5 billion (US$7.7 billion).[11] New Tax
Regime[edit] The New Tax Regime was announced for individuals & HUF in Budget
2020 and became effective from financial year 2020-21. According to it,
individuals can opt for reduced tax rates with no option for claiming
exemptions & deductions. Currently, Indian taxpayers can choose between the
old tax regime and the new tax regime.[12] At the time of introduction, it had
7 different slabs. After three years from introduction, Indian Government
reduced both the slab count & tax rates under New Tax Regime in Budget 2023,
after reports of poor adoption to new tax regime by tax payers[13] Tax
brackets[edit] For the assessment year 2013–25, individuals earning up to ₹2.5
lakh (US$3,000) were exempt from income tax.[14] About one percent of the
population, the upper class, falls under the 30-percent slab. It increased by
an average of 22 percent from 2000 to 2010, encompassing 580,000 income-tax
payers. The common man, who fall under the 10- and 20-percent slabs, grew by
an average of seven percent annually to 2.78 million income-tax payers.[15]
Agricultural income[edit] According to section 10(1) of the Act, agricultural
income is tax-exempt. Section 2(1A) defines agricultural income as: Rent or
revenue derived from land in India which is used for agricultural purposes
Income derived from such land by agricultural operations, including the
processing of agricultural produce, raised or received as rent-in-kind, for
the market or for sale Income attributable to a farm house, subject to
conditions Income derived from saplings or seedlings grown in a nursery Mixed
agricultural and business income[edit] Income in the activities below is
initially computed as business income, after permissible deductions.
Thereafter, 40, 35 or 25 percent of the income is treated as business income
and the rest is treated as agricultural income. Income Business income
Agricultural income Growing and manufacturing tea in India 40% 60% Sale of
latex, latex-based crepe or brown crepe manufactured from field latex or
coalgum obtained from rubber plants grown by a seller in India 35% 65% Sale of
coffee grown and cured by an Indian seller 25% 75% Sale of coffee grown,
cured, roasted and ground by an Indian seller 40% 60% Deductions[edit] These
are permissible deductions according to the Finance Act, 2015: §80C – Up to ₹
150,000: Provident and Voluntary Provident Funds (VPF) Public Provident Fund
(PPF) Life-insurance premiums Equity-Linked Savings Scheme (ELSS) Home-loan
principal repayment Stamp duty and registration fees for a home Sukanya
Samriddhi Account National Savings Certificate (NSC) (VIII Issue)
Infrastructure bonds §80CCC – Life Insurance Corporation annuity premiums up
to ₹ 150,000 §80CCD – Employee pension contributions, up to 10 percent of
salary §80CCG – Rajiv Gandhi Equity Savings Scheme, 2013: 50 percent of
investment or ₹25,000 (whichever is lower), up to ₹ 50,000 §80D – Medical-
insurance premium, up to ₹ 25,000 for self/family and up to ₹ 15,000 for
parents (up to ₹ 50,000 for senior citizens); premium cannot be paid in cash.
§80DD – Expenses for medical treatment (including nursing), training and
rehabilitation of a permanently-disabled dependent, up to ₹ 75,000 (₹ 1,25,000
for a severe disability, as defined by law) §80DDB – Medical expenses, up to ₹
40,000 (₹ 100,000 for senior citizens) §80E – Student-loan interest §80EE –
Home-loan interest (up to 100,000 on a loan up to ₹ 2.5 million) §80G –
Charitable contributions (50 or 100 percent) §80GG – Rent minus 10 percent of
income, up to ₹ 5,000 per month or 25 percent of income (whatever is less)[16]
§80TTA – Interest on savings, up to ₹ 10,000 §80TTB – Time deposit interest
for senior citizens, up to ₹ 50,000 80U – Certified-disability deduction (₹
75,000; ₹ 125,000 for a severe disability) §87A – Rebate (up to ₹ 12,500) for
individuals with income up to ₹ 5,00,000 80RRB – Certified royalties on a
patent registered on or after 1 April 2003, up to ₹ 300,000 §80QQB – Certified
book royalties (except textbooks), up to ₹ 300,000 Due dates[edit] The due
date for a return is: 31 October of the assessment year - Companies without
international transactions, entities requiring auditing, or partners of an
audited firm 30 November - Companies without international transactions 31
July – All other filers Individuals with an income of less than ₹500,000 (less
than ₹10,000 of which is from interest) who have not changed jobs are exempt
from income tax.[17] Although individual and HUF taxpayers must file their
income-tax returns online, digital signatures are not required.[17] Advance
tax[edit] The practice of paying taxes in advance rather than in a single sum
at the end of the fiscal year is known as advance tax. These taxes, often
known as the 'pay-as-you-earn' scheme, is paid on tax bills above ₹10,000 in
installments instead of as a lump sum. The schedule of advance tax payment for
individual and corporate taxpayers are: On or before 15 June – 15 percent of
advance tax liability On or before 15 September – 45 percent of advance tax
liability On or before 15 December – 75 percent of advance tax liability On or
before 15 March – 100 percent of advance tax liability Amendments due to
COVID-19[edit] There was no change in the timeline for tax payment; however,
if the deposit of Advance Tax is delayed, a reduced interest rate of 9 percent
per annum, or 0.75 percent per month,[18] will be applicable instead of the
current rate of 12 percent per annum, or 1 percent, for payment of all taxes
falling between 20 March 2020 and 30 June 2020. Tax deduction at source[edit]
Income tax is also paid by tax deduction at source (TDS): Section Payment TDS
threshold TDS 192 Salary Exemption limit As specified in Part III of I
Schedule 193 Interest on securities Subject to provisions 10% 194A Other
interest Banks – ₹10,000 (under age 60); ₹ 50,000 (over 60). All other
interest – ₹5,000 10% 194B Lottery winnings ₹10,000 30% 194BB Horse-racing
winnings ₹10,000 30% 194C Payment to resident contractors ₹30,000 (single
contract); ₹100,000 (multiple contracts) 2% (companies); 1% otherwise 194D
Insurance commission ₹15,000 5% (individual), 10% (domestic companies) 194DA
Life-insurance payment ₹100,000 1% 194E Payment to non-resident sportsmen or
sports association Not applicable 20% 194EE Payment of deposit under National
Savings Scheme ₹2,500 10% 194F Repurchase of unit by Mutual Fund or Unit Trust
of India Not applicable 20% 194G Commission on sale of lottery tickets ₹15,000
5% 194H Brokerage commission ₹15,000 2% 194-I Rents ₹180,000 2% (plant,
machinery, equipment), 10% (land, building, furniture) 194IA Purchase of
immovable property ₹5,000,000 1% 194IB Rent by individual or HUF not liable to
tax audit ₹50,000 5% 194J Professional or technical services, royalties
₹30,000 10% 194LA Compensation on acquisition of certain immovable property
₹250,000 10% 194LB Interest paid by Infrastructure Development Fund under
section 10(47) to non-resident or foreign company – 5% 194LC Interest paid by
Indian company or business trust on money borrowed in foreign currency under a
loan agreement or long-term bonds – 5% 195 Interest or other amounts paid to
non-residents or a foreign company (except under §115O) As computed by
assessing officer on application under §195(2) or 195(3) Avoiding double
taxation Corporate tax[edit] Number of corporate taxpayers by income The tax
rate is 25 percent for domestic companies. For new companies incorporated
after 1 October 2019 and beginning production before 31 March 2023, the tax
rate is 15 percent. Both rates apply only if a company claims no exemptions or
concessions. For foreign companies, the tax rate is 40 percent (50 percent on
royalties and technical services). Surcharges and cesses, including a four-
percent health-and-education cess, are levied on the flat rate.[19] Electronic
filing is mandatory.[20] Surcharges[edit] Non-corporate taxpayers pay a
10-percent surcharge on income between ₹ 5 million and ₹ 10 million. There is
a 15-percent surcharge on income over ₹ 10 million. Domestic companies pay
seven percent on taxable income between ₹ 10 million and ₹ 100 million, and 12
percent on income over ₹ 100 million. Foreign companies pay two percent on
income between ₹ 10 million and ₹ 100 million, and five percent on income over
₹ 100 million. Tax returns[edit] There are four types of income-tax returns:
Normal return (§139(1)) – Individuals with an income above ₹ 250,000 (under
age 60), ₹ 300,000 (age 60 years to 79 years), or ₹ 500,000 (over 80) must
file a return. Due dates vary. A belated return, under §139(4), may be filed
before the end of the assessment year. A revised return, under §139(5), may be
filed for a normal or belated return by the end of the assessment year. An
assessing officer may flag a defective return under §139(9). Defects must be
rectified by the taxpayer within 15 days of notification. Annual information
return and statements[edit] Those responsible for registering or maintaining
accounting books or other documents with a record of any specified financial
transaction[21] must file an annual information return (Form No. 61A).
Producers of a cinematographic film during the financial year must file a
statement (Form No. 52A) within 30 days of the end of the financial year or
within 30 days of the end of production, whichever is earlier. Non-residents
with a liaison office in India must deliver Form No. 49A to the assessing
officer within sixty days of the end of the financial year. Finance Act,
2021[edit] In the Finance Act, 2021, the government has introduced the
following changes on the Income Tax Act, 1961: Amendments for taxation of
income arising from Firm/AOP/BOI; Increased tax Incentives for International
Finance Service Centre; Denial of depreciation on Goodwill; Full value of
consideration for computation of capital gains on slump sale to be at Fair
Value; Enhancement of Limit for Tax Audit; and Definition of the word "Liable
to Tax" is introduced. Assessment[edit] Self-assessment is done on a
taxpayer's return. The department assesses tax under section 143(3)
(scrutiny), 144 (best judgement), 147 (income escaping assessment) and 153A
(search and seizure). Notices for such assessments are issued under sections
143(2), 148 and 153A, respectively. Time limits are prescribed in section
153.[22] Penalties[edit] Penalties can be levied under §271(1)(c)[23] for
concealing or misrepresenting income. Penalties may range from 100 to 300
percent of the tax evaded. Under-reporting or misreporting income is penalized
under §270A. Penalties are 50 percent of the tax on under-reported income and
200 percent of the tax on misreported income. Late fees are payable under
§234F. New Direct Tax Code[edit] In the budget 2025, tabled by the Finance
Minister on 01.02.2025, the FM affirmed and said that the new direct tax code
will be presented in the coming weak replacing Income Tax Act, 1961.[24] The
union cabinet on 07.02.2025 cleared the new Income Tax Bill to replace the old
Income Tax Act, 1961 from April 1, 2026.[25] See also[edit] Taxation in India
References[edit] ^ Compiled from Comptroller and Auditor General of India
reports. ^ Institute of Chartered Accountants of India (2011). Taxation. ISBN
978-81-8441-290-1. ^ "Growth of Income Tax revenue in India" (PDF). Archived
(PDF) from the original on 27 February 2012. Retrieved 16 November 2012. ^
"Home – Central Board of Direct Taxes, Government of India".
Incometaxindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 2 December 2015.
Retrieved 18 April 2018. ^ "Total direct tax collections for FY18-19 fall
short by Rs 83,000 crore". Moneycontrol.com. 2 April 2019. Archived from the
original on 5 June 2020. Retrieved 22 August 2020. ^ Hultzsch, E. (1925).
Inscriptions of Asoka. Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 164–165 ^ a b c Jha S M
(1990). "Taxation and Indian Economy". New Delhi: Deep and Deep
Publications.{{cite book}}: CS1 maint: numeric names: authors list (link) CS1
maint: publisher location (link) ^ a b c "The evolution of income-tax".
thehindubusinessline.com. Archived from the original on 4 August 2019.
Retrieved 4 August 2019. ^ a b c d "Evolution of Income Tax System in India"
(PDF). Shodhganga. Archived (PDF) from the original on 7 July 2020. Retrieved
4 August 2019. ^ "Impact of DTC on India Inc", The Hindu Business Line, 6
September 2010 ^ "Black money haul: Rs 65,250 crore collected through Income
Declaration Scheme", The Economic Times, 1 October 2016, archived from the
original on 4 October 2016, retrieved 1 October 2016 ^ "Union Budget 2023: New
vs Old Tax Regime - See What Has Changed". NDTV.com. Archived from the
original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2023. ^ "Why hasn't the new
tax regime taken off?". The Times of India. 24 January 2023. Archived from the
original on 1 February 2023. Retrieved 1 February 2023. ^ "All you need to
know about Income Tax Returns for AY 2016–17", Daily News and Analysis, 16
April 2016, archived from the original on 20 April 2025, retrieved 24 April
2013 ^ Santosh Tiwari. "Evasion of personal tax dips to 59% of mop-up". The
Financial Express. Archived from the original on 19 April 2014. Retrieved 19
April 2014. ^ "Tax Laws & Rules > Acts > Income-tax Act, 1961".
www.incometaxindia.gov.in. Archived from the original on 10 May 2018.
Retrieved 1 November 2019. ^ a b "E-Filing is mandatory Income is more than 5
lacs". CA club india. Archived from the original on 29 June 2013. Retrieved 14
July 2013. ^ "Tax relief for industries affected by Coronavirus". pib.gov.in.
Archived from the original on 27 June 2021. Retrieved 16 June 2021. ^ "Income
Tax rates for Companies". businesssetup.in. Archived from the original on 18
May 2015. Retrieved 12 May 2015. ^ "Corporate taxpayers must file
electronically, point 4 of I T circular" (PDF). Archived from the original
(PDF) on 4 January 2007. Retrieved 22 November 2006. ^ "Annual Information
return". Archived from the original on 25 August 2012. Retrieved 17 September
2012. ^ Kumar, Kuldip (27 March 2016), "Readers' Corner: Taxation", Business
Standard, archived from the original on 6 May 2016, retrieved 24 April 2016 ^
"Section 271 of India IT Act". Archived from the original on 14 October 2013.
Retrieved 17 September 2012. ^ "New income tax bill expected to be presented
in Parliament next week, finance secy says it won't have any new taxes".
economic times. ^ "Cabinet clears new income tax bill, likely to be tabled in
Lok Sabha Monday: Sources". India Today. 7 February 2025. Retrieved 8 February
2025. External links[edit] Official website Retrieved from
"https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Income_tax_in_India&oldid;=1296021426"
Categories: Income tax in IndiaIncome taxesHidden categories: Pages with non-
numeric formatnum argumentsCS1 maint: numeric names: authors listCS1 maint:
publisher locationArticles with short descriptionShort description is
different from WikidataArticles needing additional references from April
2016All articles needing additional referencesUse Indian English from
September 2013All Wikipedia articles written in Indian EnglishUse dmy dates
from October 2020 Search Search Income tax in India 4 languages Add topic